= GoodData Ruby wrapper and CLI

A convenient Ruby wrapper around the GoodData RESTful API.

Use the Gooddata::Client class to integrate GoodData into your own application
or use the CLI to work with GoodData directly from the command line.

The best documentation for the API can be found using these resources:
* http://developer.gooddata.com/api
* https://secure.gooddata.com/gdc

== Usage

Since this project is in its early stages, no gem have been released to rubygems.org yet.
To install the gooddata gem, you instead have to first checkout this repository. Then install
the gem using the rake task:

  rake install

Now you are ready to use either the Ruby wrapper class or the CLI.

Alternatively you can run the source code directly. For details about this approach, see {the
Development Wiki page}[http://github.com/gooddata/gooddata-ruby/wiki/Development].

=== Wrapper class usage

For details of how to use the Ruby wrapper class, see the Gooddata::Client RDoc.

=== CLI Usage

After installing the gooddata gem, GoodData is available from your command line using
the <tt>gooddata</tt> command. To get a complete overview of possible options type:

  gooddata help

The examples and descriptions below does not cover all the options available via the CLI.
So remember to refer back to the <tt>help</tt> command.

Before you do anything else, a good idea is to see if your account is set up correctly and 
that you can log in. To do this, use the <tt>api:test</tt> command:

  gooddata api:test

==== Authentication

As you saw if you ran the above test command <tt>gooddata</tt> will prompt you
for your GoodData username and password. If you don't wish to write your
credentials each time you connect to GoodData using <tt>gooddata</tt>, you can
create a simple gooddata credentials file called <tt>.gooddata</tt> in the root
of your home directory. To make it easy you can just run the credentials file
generator command which will create the file for you:

  gooddata auth:store

==== List available projects

To get a list of projects available to your GoodData user account, run:

  gooddata projects

The output from the above command will look similar to this:

     521  Some project
    3521  Some other project
    3642  Some third project

The first column contains the project-key. You need this if you wan't to either
see more details about the project using the <tt>projects:show</tt> comamnd or
if you wish to delete the project using the <tt>projects:delete</tt> command.

==== Create a new project

To create a new project under on the GoodData servers, run:

  gooddata projects:create

You will then be asked about the desired project name and summary before it's created.

== Note on Patches/Pull Requests
 
* Fork the project.
* Make your feature addition or bug fix.
* Add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a
  future version unintentionally.
* Commit, do not mess with rakefile, version, or history.
  (if you want to have your own version, that is fine but bump version in a commit by itself we can ignore when we pull)
* Send us a pull request. Bonus points for topic branches.

== Credits

This project is developed and maintained by Pavel Kolesnikov [ mailto:pavel@gooddata.com
/ {@koles}[http:/twitter.com/koles] ] and Thomas Watson Steen [ mailto:w@tson.dk /
{@wa7son}[http://twitter.com/wa7son] ]

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2010 - 2011 GoodData Corporation and Thomas Watson Steen. See LICENSE for details.
